The 2019 World Cup features 10 teams, a decrease from previous World Cups in 2011 and 2015 which featured 14 teams. The hosts, England, and the top seven other teams in the ICC One Day International rankings as of 30 September 2017 earned an automatic qualification, with the remaining two spots being decided by the 2018 Cricket World Cup Qualifier.

On 19 September 2017, results confirmed that the top eight ranked teams by 30 September would be Australia, Bangladesh, England, India, New Zealand, Pakistan, South Africa and Sri Lanka; and these teams all qualified automatically for the 2019 World Cup.

At the time of the announcement of the qualification structure, ICC Associate and Affiliate Members, who were guaranteed four spots in the previous two World Cup tournaments, could be represented by at most two teams, and possibly none at all if they were beaten by the lowest-ranked Full Members in the Qualifier. It also meant that at least two of the ten Test-playing nations at the time of the announcement would have to play in the qualifying tournament, and could miss the World Cup finals entirely. It also ensured that this was the first World Cup to be contested without all of the Full Member nations being present.

Following recent successes, Ireland and Afghanistan were promoted to the ICC ODI Championship and were also granted full ICC membership, becoming the newest Test cricketing nations. However, they still needed to qualify for the World Cup via the current process.[citation needed]

The final stage of the tournament was a "Super Six" group, from which the top two teams qualified for the 2019 World Cup. The West Indies were guaranteed a spot after defeating Scotland in the penultimate round. Afghanistan joined them after defeating Ireland in the final over of their match. This was the first time since 1983 that Zimbabwe had failed to qualify for a World Cup contest. Ireland also missed the competition for the first time since 2003, and for the first time no Associate nation participated.